>>LISA GARR: Hi, I'm Lisa Garr,
host of "Gaiam Inspirations,"
and we are coming to you
live from the Gaiam studios
here in Boulder,
Colorado, and since this
is a live interactive show,
I encourage you to interact
with us through
Facebook and Twitter.
Many of you already
started that process,
so keep the comments
and the questions
coming throughout the show.
The topic of global
climate change
brings up so many
unanswered questions
about solar flares, earthquakes,
and a lot of uncertainty.
We're definitely going
through a cyclical change,
but what does that mean
exactly, and how will
it ultimately help
us all come together?
Joining me today
is Mitch Battros.
He is a scientific journalist
and a psychologist.
He's highly respected in both
the scientific and spiritual
communities because
of his unique ability
to bridge the gap between modern
science and ancient texts.
Welcome to the show, Mitch,
thanks for joining me.
>>MITCH BATTROS: Thank you.
>>LISA: So tell us a little bit
about the solar flares-- what
exactly are they, how
do they originate,
and how do they affect Earth?
>>MITCH: Well, what
creates a solar flare is
when two opposing electrical
currents on the sun collide,
and when they collide,
or several of them
together, they explode out
into space in a twirling,
twisting, kind of
like a twister,
and that is what we see.
We see kind of an arc
and this stream of what
looks like fire that comes out.
That's the initial
wave that is initiated
from the connecting electrons.
>>LISA: We have a picture
of that, actually.
>>MITCH: Oh, great
>>LISA: Kind of an idea of what
a solar flare would look like.
>>MITCH: That's what a
solar flare would look like,
and depending on the
size, it certainly
gives us an idea of what
effect that might have.
>>LISA: So there's
different sizes,
gradients of a solar flare?
>>MITCH: Yes.
>>LISA: OK, what are those?
>>MITCH: The least amount
of powerful solar flare
is what's known as a C-Class.
A C-Class is still
significant, but it's
unlikely to create what's called
a geomagnetic storm with Earth,
if it happens to
be Earth directed.
>>LISA: OK, so
that's the smallest.
>>MITCH: That's the smallest.
The next one would
be an M-Class flare--
you could say M for moderate,
and it can be very powerful.
That could does,
almost every time,
create a geomagnetic
effect when it
hits the Earth's magnetic field.
That's when you might see the
Aurora Borealis is often known.
The less-
>>LISA: The most,
actually, the biggest one?
>>MITCH: Well, I going to
save the less incident that
could occur that's not
as pleasant as seen
a beautiful aurora, even an
M-Class flare could knock out
satellites.
It could also disrupt cellphones
related to the satellites
and have disruption.
And the X-Class,
the largest class
of the solar flares, that
can be really significant.
That is when the potential of
knocking out the satellites,
injuring-- whenever the
space shuttle was going up,
if any solar events were
occurring, especially
during the time
of solar maximum,
even as it was rising
up the Bell Curve,
they would stand down.
There have been two incidents
where the shuttle was
in flight and solar
flare erupted.
They have a special compartment
in the space shuttle
that the astronauts go
in there for protection.
>>LISA: If-- if it that were to
happen when they're in space.
>>MITCH: It did happen.
>>LISA: And it did happen.
>>MITCH: And the same
with the space station.
The space station is
not going anywhere,
it's staying up
there, and they also
have a special
compartment which they've
had to use several times when
the solar flares come our way.
>>LISA: Interesting.
One of our Facebook
questions is coming in--
if you can see these solar
flares from a telescope.
>>MITCH: Yes, you can.
There are several ground based
telescopes, fairly large,
that people use, mostly in
the professions-- universities
or professional astronomers.
There, at times, again,
depending on the skies
and if you're in a dark place,
and what phase the solar cycle
is in, smaller telescopes
have been known to see that.
>>LISA: To grasp that.
So when have we seen these in
history, these solar flares
and their different sizes
you're talking about?
>>MITCH: Well, it
happens all the time.
It goes on an 11-year
cycle which takes you
from a minimum to a maximum,
that's 11 years, and then
another 11 years to go
from maximum to minimum.
So really it's a 22-year cycle--
11 years up, approximately,
and 11 years down.
Right now, we are
at solar maximum,
or coming very close to it.
>>LISA: We're at one of the
peaks of the cycle right now?
>>MITCH: We're at one of
the peaks of the cycle.
In cycle-- which is
cycle 24, and cycle 23
it showed much larger
and more significant.
There were solar flares,
several X-Class flares,
and one that happened on
November 3, 2003, that
literally had to have
the space weather
center, NOAA, recalibrate
their instruments.
It literally pegged
their instruments
because it was so powerful.
They went up to X10 at the
time, this one was an X45.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>MITCH: Largest one in
history, but that's subjective.
>>LISA: What impact did that
make on Earth at the time?
>>MITCH: Luckily enough,
that happened to just
be rotating around the
eastern limb of the sun,
so if you-- as you can see the
screen-- looking at the sun,
for example, that
solar flare you
see on your screen, that
is the eastern limb,
that part of the curve.
I'm sorry, that's
the western limb.
When we're looking at
the sun, it's opposite,
so the right side would be west,
which would typically be east,
and the left side would be east.
So it was just rotating around
eastern limb of the sun,
so it didn't have the
full force towards Earth
when that X45 went off.
If it had, it probably
would been every bit as bad
as what's called the Keridan
Event, which was, I believe,
1857.
>>LISA: And what happened?
>>MITCH: It was so
powerful that at the time,
there weren't telephones, but
the telegraph people that--
dot, dot, dot, dot,
dot-- it knocked out
several of the lines
or the power lines,
and on occasion, it would
hit the telegraph station,
setting it on fire.
>>LISA: Oh my goodness.
>>MITCH: If it were to happen
today, I don't know what--
>>LISA: So it literally
penetrated the magnetic field?
>>MITCH: It literally
penetrated the lines
and traveled down the lines
right into the compartment,
lighting the paper--
telegraph paper-- on fire.
>>LISA: So tell us
how this exactly
affects the Earth's core
when these particles come
into and penetrate through
the Earth's magnetic field.
>>MITCH: What
happens is the Earth
has an inner core
and an outer core.
The inner core is solid--
iron, if you will,
iron, magnesium-- the
outer core is liquid.
They call it a dipole theory, so
it's like a magnetic bar that's
in the middle of Earth, so when
the charged particles come,
and it it's Earth directed,
it hits the Earth's
magnetic field, most of
the charged particles
are deflected because
of our magnetic field,
and they kind of warp
around the Earth,
so there's kind of
a tail behind it.
Some charged
particles penetrate,
and that's where the
problems are, in addition
to the satellites.
>>LISA: OK, so now, when those
charged particles penetrate
and they turn into
kind of a funnel, what
does that look
like in our galaxy?
What is that--
what happens, what
experience happens
in our galaxy?
>>MITCH: Interesting
you ask that,
because not a lot of
people are aware of that.
This is breaking news.
This may be, at
most, one week old.
>>LISA: Oh, good.
>>MITCH: This is cutting edge.
Astrophysicists, because of
the new instruments we have,
the new spacecraft we have, the
new satellites that we have,
we now have information
we've never had before.
They just published their
findings, their latest research
data, that does show
a direct causal affect
pf our galaxy, Milky
Way, and the sun.
That has not been
presented before.
Now people-- many
of the scientists--
had known about the
sun- connection,
but they usually described it
in descriptions of climate.
Climate is in measurements
of months, years, decades,
hundreds of years.
Weather is measured in
minutes, hours, and days.
That's changed in
the last five years,
partly due to my research
and equation, which took it
from looking at the causal
effect from the sun,
such as these charged
particles, and trying
to measure in
decades, to asking,
is there an immediate
causal effect?
There is-- the solar
flare acts like a spike.
That's the first shot of charged
particles that shoots out.
That could reach the Earth in
eight minutes-- that's fast.
The one that does more damage
is what follows the solar flare.
That's called a
coronal mass ejection.
It's kind of like a cloud of
plasma, of charged particles.
That follows-- that takes
24 to 48 hours to reach us,
and that's what knocks
out the power grids.
>>LISA: OK, so that then
penetrates what you say--
the magnetic field, and then it
goes to the core of the Earth
and then emanates out in
terms of plate tectonics and--
>>MITCH: That's very
close-- very close to that.
What creates the
magnetic field to begin
with is the Earth's core,
so it's already there,
but when those charged particles
hit that barrier already,
then there's kind
of a feedback--
>>LISA: OK, I see.
>>MITCH: --and a
pushback, however you
want to describe
it, and then you
have a backwash
is what I've heard
it described in
scientific terms.
>>LISA: So you were
mentioning about the galaxy,
that our Milky Way creates--
>>MITCH: This is so
exciting, and I'm
glad to be with you to
be able to share that.
>>LISA: Us, too, yeah.
>>MITCH: It's fascinating.
I think I'm the first one
to have broken this story.
>>LISA: On live
television, perfect.
>>MITCH: Well, absolutely.
That is that NASA
has now published
that their findings
of the galactic center
has a source of charged
particles, always have,
they're known as
galactic cosmic rays.
Something is shifting
not only with our sun,
but with the galaxy.
They're describing
what could be a tilt,
or perhaps the
spiral of our galaxy
is expanding or contracting,
maybe a little bit of both,
but the reaction of that is
this funnel of charged particles
appears to be strengthening
or tightening or becoming
more funneled.
In addition to
that, this is where
that some ancient
text plays a role,
it appears that this
funnel of charged particles
from our Milky Way
may be slowly turning
towards our solar
system, which means
we're in direct alignment.
Now, Mayan prophecy or--
really, I call it Mayan text,
because it's written-- that
there would be something that's
called a galactic
alignment, a galactic center
and galactic alignment.
Many of my scientific
colleagues believe
that that's already happened,
in 1998-- that may be true.
I believe that even
if it was 1998,
not 2012, that there's this
window of opportunity that
could be years on either
side that would still
have this effect, because
if you are you looking
at a process that's
slowly going,
like when you have a flashlight,
it takes time to get through,
and it could affect
the whole range.
There are some great graphics,
actually photos, again, because
of our instruments
in space, that
can be presented
on your screen now.
That's not a photo,
that is an illustration,
but that basically is
what it looks like.
You see how that funnel
is in the middle?
NASA actually recently produced
a video that maybe we'll see.
>>LISA: We have that
video, yes, this clearly
illustrates what it is that
Mitch is talking about,
in terms of this funnel,
this galactic alignment.
Let's take a look at
that video from NASA.
[HEARTBEAT]
>>LISA: So this is a
video that NASA produced
that shows what happens when the
flare comes from the Milky Way
and hits the sun?
>>MITCH: That's right, the
solar system is a whole,
and NASA calls this
the galactic heartbeat.
As you could see from the
video, that pulsation--
there was a rhythmic pulsation
that comes from the center.
These are galactic cosmic rays.
In addition to the pulse
is this stream, as you saw.
Now, again, the new
information, scientifically,
is suggesting that something
is shifting with our galaxy
and that more cosmic rays are
coming through and heading
our direction.
The Mayans, basically,
I think, have
said the same thing, and
other religions, as well,
or other ancient
text communities.
This has a significance in
two ways-- one, if it's true,
if what we're seeing
and is something
very similar to ancient text,
what's been said by the Mayans
and so forth, it becomes
somewhat predictable.
Now instead of kind of
not knowing and so forth,
this may bring the
scientific community perhaps
in the closer range in
communication of ancient text.
That is what I sense
happening right now.
And
>>LISA: So you've been in the
middle of that convergence.
>>MITCH: Right in
the middle of it,
and it's been a tough road--it's
a very delicate line that I
have--
>>LISA: Fine line there.
>>MITCH: --that I
have to go through.
One thing I want to add to
this about the cosmic rays--
it has an effect on
the whole solar system,
but first it hits the sun.
The sun is what absorbs
most right off the bat.
What NASA has found out, again,
within the last few days,
is that there's something
different with the solar flares
we're experiencing now.
A moderate solar
flare, am M-Class flare
is powerful and can
cost some damage,
but you're not
quite as concerned.
Everybody's looking
for the X-Class flares.
>>LISA: Is this what we're
looking at here on this image,
something we consider a--
>>MITCH: Well, no, this
image is where it all starts.
Actually, I say that
now until we know more,
but this is the
first time that we're
making a connection
between our solar system
and the galaxy, the Milky Way.
>>LISA: Interesting, OK.
>>MITCH: My initial research
was the sun-Earth connection.
I wanted to know what
is the cause of Earth's
cyclical events.
That took me to the sun.
Now, in my third
book, I want to know
what is causing the sun's
cycle-- it's the galaxy,
it's our Milky Way,
and that's what
you're seeing on the screen.
>>LISA: And so the
galaxy, the Milky Way,
affects the solar cycles,
and these solar flares then
penetrate through
Earth's magnetic field
and can affect earthquakes--
could this give you the ability
to predict earthquakes?
Is this what your
equation is all about?
>>MITCH: It gives us the
ability to actually make
an announce-- it would
be a global announcement,
and we could say
extreme weather,
because we don't
know if it's going
to be an earthquake, a volcano,
tornado, tropical storms that
turn into hurricanes.
We don't know exactly how
it's going to manifest,
and they're not going to
use that language yet,
because we can't give you a
specific geographical area.
Only then would it be
useful, like there's
a tornado watch and a
tornado warning-- there might
be something coming,
there's one here, hide.
It would be reckless to do that
with the knowledge we have now,
but we're going
in that direction.
>>LISA: Interesting.
It would throw people
into a lot of panic.
But this equation that you
created is-- essentially
what we see on the
screen right now
is what you're
talking about here,
these are the solar flares
causing earthquake activity,
volcanoes, hurricanes,
twisters, all sorts of things.
>>MITCH: That's right.
The cause of, what initiates
usually comes in cycles,
or it could come
systematically where
one begets another, that
is initiated by the sun
and transferred through
the magnetic field, which
correlates to the jet stream,
which correlates to the ocean
currents and the Earth's core.
>>LISA: So the
whole conversation
about global warming being
the effective pollution
on the planet and
over population
and our damage to the
planet doesn't really
make sense in this
context, does it?
No.
>>MITCH: In addition
to that, I don't
know what's
happening-- this could
be part of this transition
to they use Mayan language.
Prior to the last
decade, I would say,
science was pretty
straightforward.
It wasn't public access so much.
I've never, ever, ever
seen it so politicized
in my life than it is now.
>>LISA: Global warming?
>>MITCH: The science community.
>>LISA: Oh, OK.
>>MITCH: And, so
before that, you
had to go through a peer review,
and I've been through a couple,
and you get chewed up.
Any weakness you have in
your theory, they'll find it,
which should be there, it
serves a very useful purpose.
What seems to have
happened is there's
kind of been a selective
collection of people
who were in the peer
review, and as a result,
this global warming thing
has lost its integrity.
Some of your audience may
know of Climate Gate-- what
happened with Climate Gate is
there was a whistle blower who
got into the computers of
the climate specialists
and found some horrific
statements of documents
and emails that show clearly
this global warming thing is
totally politicized.
>>LISA: Why is it politicized?
Who's to gain?
>>MITCH: It appears to be money.
There's something called
the carbon tax, initiated
by Al Gore, who is
the one who would
be raking in all the money.
He is also part of who initiated
this idea of global warming.
It was 1977, just to give a
brief history, 1977 Senate
hearing.
I'm not sure the
words they used--
I doubt they used
climate change, probably
atmospheric conditions
or something
like that-- Jim
Hanson comes in, he
was contracting with
NASA at the time,
and shows this hockey stick,
which Michael Mann created
through computer
simulation, in other words,
guesswork-- this
is what we think.
Michael Mann, James
Hansen, and Al Gore,
who happen to be a
senator at the time,
happened to be in
the Senate committee,
and just latched onto it.
At that very moment,
or very shortly after,
James Hansen created the
word global warming-- there
was no such word before.
>>LISA: Well, what do the
environmentalists have to say
about this, what do--
>>MITCH: I'm glad you said that.
There are a lot of
environmentalists--
what I believe to be the true
environmentalists-- who are not
happy.
They got sucked in
to this-- I don't
know what to call it-- some
type of plan or something,
and I think they were sucked in.
Of course everybody
wants a clean planet,
want to be stewards of the
Earth, want clean water,
clean air.
I don't know anybody--
>>LISA: But there is-- our
forests are being cut down,
there are plastic
garbage patches
in the middle of the ocean.
I mean there is definitely an
environmental crisis going on,
I believe.
>>MITCH: I believe so-- I
mean, actually I'm not sure.
Let's say there
is-- I don't have
any problems saying there is.
The question is, if we were
somehow to reduce carbon,
because that's what they
point to is specifically
man-made carbon
emissions, would that
make a difference on
this warming trend?
My scientific research, as
well as many others, say no.
Is our pollution having
a marginal effect?
Yes, but my data is saying one,
two, three five percent, not--
Al Gore, James Hansen, and
global warming et al say 100%.
>>LISA: Well, what
about-- our listeners
are asking about the melting
of the ice caps, various things
that are attributed
to global warming.
>>MITCH: Yeah,
unfortunately, that's
happened many times before.
The Earth goes through cycles.
I'm not denying we're in
a warming trend-- there's
warming trends and
cooling trends.
We're in a warming
trend right now.
Some scientists and
people are happy we
are, that we're not
freezing right now.
>>LISA: Is there a
cooling trend coming?
>>MITCH: Absolutely.
>>LISA: At what point?
>>MITCH: Some believe
it's already started.
>>LISA: I've heard
that, as well,
but how long do
these trends last?
>>MITCH: I don't think
there's anyone number.
I think there are cycles within
cycles, cycles that supersede
cycles-- to take the
solar cycle, for example,
there's an 11-year
cycle, 22-year cycle.
We hear about the 100-year
floods, there's 100-year cycle,
2,300-year-- I don't
know what cycle we're in.
Hard to say--
>>LISA: Interesting
>>MITCH: Possibly we
might make some headway
into finding out
where we are, but I
think that's exactly
what's happening--
we are in that cycle.
I do want to make the statement,
because so many people
misunderstand me, I
would say there's not
a lot of people who do more
for environment than I do.
I'm from Seattle, and Seattle
is very conscious of recycling,
the whole bit, very clean
parks, people do a great job.
I don't know anyone, not
one person, honestly,
who's pro pollution.
I go further and say if you
find one, put him in jail,
I could care less.
>>LISA: I'm really glad
you said that, actually,
because there are a
lot of efforts that
are going towards recycling, a
lot of efforts that are going
towards cleaning up our
planet, and that absolutely
has nothing to do with the whole
global warming conversation
that the scientific
community is having--
it's about responsibility.
>>MITCH: I think
that's wonderful.
The environmentalists
that I know,
the ones who know
about permaculture,
who know about
sustainability, who
know about community gardening--
those are the ones who I think
got cheated.
I'm on board with them.
I don't know if
many other who are
on what I'll call the global
warming bandwagon even
understand what's going on.
Here's the danger-- there's
only so much money we have.
We can spend it on this
carbon tax thing, which
gets Al Gore rich, or we can--
>>LISA: How do you really feel?
>>MITCH: --or we can
put it towards what
I believe preparedness
for this warming trend,
and perhaps a coming
cooling trend,
and we'd better get
busy, because the IPCC--
this is where I don't
disagree with them--
the international consortium
on global warming,
or climate change,
rather-- they believe that
as a result of the warming
trend, that some places may
be flooded-- coastlines,
because of the melt.
Let's say that's true--
are we really putting
the effort into migration?
>>LISA: There are so many topics
that we could cover here-- it
has to do with oil
and free energy
and those types of
things, but we're
going to talk about
that when we come back.
We're going to talk
more about understanding
what the ancient
texts and the Mayans
have to say about
this trend, as well.
We'll be right back.
I'm Lisa Garr.
Welcome back, I'm Lisa
Garr, and my guest
is scientific journalist
Mitch Battros,
and we're talking
about Earth changes
and climate change, essentially,
is what we're talking about.
What do the ancient texts
have to say about this?
What do the Mayan prophecies
>>MITCH: Yes, all of the
ancient texts that most of us
are aware of actually have
written about climate change
and cyclical events-- certainly
in the Bible, the Noah flood,
very well, I think, was
probably a flood, where,
for whatever reasons, the waters
rise, to who knows how high.
Other events that
the Earth will shake
and the buildings are falling
down or temples and so forth,
earthquakes, and
we certainly know
about the history
of volcanoes, so I
think it's clearly been
documented throughout history
that these cyclical events have
been occurring related to Earth
changing events, such as this,
and also, some of the ancients
go further, telling us
about something that's
coming from the sky
that could be the cause.
>>LISA: And this is what some
of the Mayan texts were saying.
>>MITCH: The Mayans especially.
>>LISA: How does the
Vatican come into play
with all of this?
>>MITCH: The Vatican?
>>LISA: Do they have
something to say about it?
What does religion have to say?
>>MITCH: They do, and it will
be a surprise to most of you,
I think, being a
Catholic boy myself, I
was comfortable with it,
but my parents were not.
It was 1994, I believe it
was, when Pope John Paul
II came out and said, I'm
paraphrasing, that there should
be no reason that creation
and evolution can co-exist.
Now I know that sounds very
simplistic, and many of you
are maybe saying, duh, but
for the Catholic community,
that was a shocker.
>>LISA: That they can coexist?
>>MITCH: No, that
they-- yeah, the shock
is that they could coexist,
because the Bible tells us
that the Earth was created
in seven days, and so on,
and evolution is blasphemy.
So to hear the pope,
actually affirm that OK,
so there's evolution--
big deal, what
does that have to do anything
with creation and Jesus
and God?
So the Vatican has taken
note of things like that,
and especially with
the new information
we're getting, because
of the instruments,
the now pope, Pope
Benedict, actually
called a consortium
six months ago--
>>LISA: Oh, recently.
>>MITCH: --recently, of
the leading physicists
of the world.
He called them into the
Vatican, and the discussion
was about String Theory,
was about quantum physics,
was about the Big Bang,
what is happening out
in space, the
universe, the galaxy,
that seems to be changing.
>>LISA: So as above, so below.
>>MITCH: I think so.
>>LISA: And then
religion comes and chimes
in this conversation
that we then
have heard from
the ancient texts
and that come in from the
Mayans and the pyramids,
and all of that seems to align
with this planetary, cosmic,
galactic conjunction,
essentially, right?
>>MITCH: I think so, and it's
probably not a coincidence
that these events, which
no one could possibly
think could occur 10 years
ago even, are now happening.
I think it's all, as some
might say, in divine order.
>>LISA: Well now
tell me how this
relates to us--
what does this have
to do with how we
relate to each other?
How is this relevant
to us today?
>>MITCH: Well, there's two
applied medical procedures
that are being used
now-- one of them I
want to talk about is
transcranial magnetic
stimulation.
It's been accepted, insurance
companies are paying for it,
and it's mostly used for
mental health issues, emotions,
so depression, anxiety,
borderline disorder,
schizophrenia.
They put on a helmet, basically,
it's kind of like that,
with magnets that has a
certain Gauss resonance,
and that has a direct effect
on the brain chemistry,
the neurons and so
forth, and they're
having great success with it.
>>LISA: So it shows
that frequency
has an effect on
brain chemistry.
>>MITCH: Exactly.
>>LISA: So you're saying
that these particles that
are coming in that penetrate
our magnetic field actually
have an effect on
brain chemistry?
>>MITCH: I believe so,
it only makes sense.
We see it in the animal
kingdom-- where it plays,
perhaps, the most
effect is migrant birds,
whales that are misdirected.
Any animal, I'd say any living
thing, that has magnetic grid
lines as their barometer,
as how they find themselves,
is definitely affected,
that's been proven.
No one denies that.
>>LISA: Interesting,
very interesting.
So this basically could
have-- it's basically
what EEG would do to the brain,
or its a feedback effect,
isn't it?
>>MITCH: I don't know if
I'd use to the term EEG,
but something similar to that.
An EEG IS where we get
readings and so forth, I
don't know if an EEG has an
effect on the brain chemistry,
but I do believe this thrust
of magnetic-- of these
charged particles-- is
playing a role not only
with natural phenomena,
but I think with us.
>>LISA: That's interesting.
So could this have to do
with a rising of emotions,
what would this do
to our behavior?
>>MITCH: Probably a
lot of your audience
is probably those that
would be described
as aware and
sensitive to energy,
and may have this idea of
a wonderful transition,
they're real excited
about the coming whatever,
but it might not go
that way for many,
in the reason for that is that
most people, I would suggest,
don't like change, even
if it's good change.
>>LISA: Understandably.
Actually, this makes
a lot of sense, yes.
>>MITCH: Those that may
an easier time of it
are simply aware
that change is about
and can maybe better
flow with things
that are familiar and
predictable, because it's
extremely disturbing--
we've all experienced it--
a breakup of a
relationship, fired
at work, torn relationships for
one reason or another, things
not going our way, it can
be extremely disturbing.
Yet there are some who seem
to just kind of float through.
I think those people
probably will say, hey,
let's go for this ride, but
perhaps maybe most of us,
it will be a bit
more challenging.
>>LISA: So what's the
good news in all of this?
>>MITCH: The good news is
that there is a transition,
and I think at the
end of the line,
if a person can simply
tap into themselves
and simply stay as
true as they can
to their integrity-- not
going to be easy for many--
but I guess, in part, it's
back to faith and belief
that this is part of something,
it's part of a process.
That's why I find
comfort in my science,
with cyclical events--
this is part of a cycle.
>>LISA: Well, there's
a cycle that's
coming upon us right now
with the Venus transit,
and it's something that's
happening right now,
during the filming of this show.
Tell us a little bit about
it-- what is the Venus transit?
>>MITCH: I'm feeling it now.
>>LISA: And how does it
affect us-- right, exactly.
Talking about feelings.
>>MITCH: Venus is
the love planet.
Like so many things with
cyclical events, and this
being the Venus transit,
I would say it's something
similar to December 21, 2012.
Many people think that
it's like a light switch--
you hit it and you feel it.
The transit-- just like with
the date of Mayan 2012--
is that it's a process.
The Venus transit, if it's
related to astrological effects
and meaning, it
would be a process.
In other words, anything that
would have happened already
is and will happen
even more after.
In the science community,
they don't necessarily
see it in the way of
astrology or something
that a person would feel.
They find great meaning in this.
Because of the Venus
transit, what it does
is a couple things--
one is it gives them
more information
about Venus itself.
Right now there's a space
ship called the Venus
Express Satellite--
>>LISA: Oh, right.
>>MITCH: --that's perched
perfectly right now to gather
incredible information,
but even more meaningful
is that it gives
scientists an opportunity,
because of the
shadow it creates,
to look for other planets.
>>LISA: What we're
seeing here is basically
where you'll able
to see this from
and what the Venus transit
is, but let's take a look
at the video so
that people can get
a clear idea of exactly
what the Venus transit is.
Let's take a look at this.
>>ANNOUNCER: The 2012
transit of Venus,
presented by Science at NASA.
One little black spot on the sun
sure can cause a lot of fuss.
Twice every 120 years,
Venus passes directly
in front of the sun.
The circular spot the planet
makes on the solar disk
is not much bigger than
an ordinary sunspot,
but every time it happens,
it is a worldwide sensation.
The next transit of
Venus is on June 5, 2012,
and for the first time
since the 19th century,
the event will be visible
across all of North America.
The nearly seven-hour transit
begins at 3:09 PM Pacific
Daylight Time.
Observers on seven continents,
even a sliver of Antarctica,
will be able to see it.
Across the United
States, the transit
is at its best around
sunset, a rare photo
op for creative photographers.
Observing tip-- do
not stare at the sun.
Venus covers too little
of the solar disk
to block the blinding glare.
Instead, use some type
of protection technique
or solar filter.
A Number 14 welder's
glass is a good choice.
For some observers, the view
provides an unsettling sense
of scale.
Venus seems so small and
fragile against the solar disc.
Our own planet is
equally minuscule.
Others say it looks like
a black hole punched
in the surface of the
sun-- very strange.
Transits of Venus first
gained worldwide attention
in the 18th century, when
one of the biggest mysteries
of science was the size
of the solar system.
It might seem amazing
today, but astronomers
didn't know the absolute
distance between any two
planets.
How many miles would you have to
travel to reach another world?
The answer was as
mysterious then
as the nature of
dark energy is now.
Venus was the key, according
to astronomer Sir Edmund Haley.
He realized that by
observing transits
from widely spaced
locations on Earth,
it should be possible to
triangulate distance to Venus.
The idea galvanized
scientists, who
set off on expeditions
around the world
to view a pair of
transits in the 1760s.
The great explorer James
Cook himself was dispatched
to observe one from
Tahiti, a place
as alien to 18th century
Europeans as the moon or Mars.
Historians have called the
international effort the Apollo
Program of the 18th century.
In retrospect, it
falls into the category
of things that only
sounded like a good idea.
Bad weather, primitive optics,
and the natural fuzziness
of Venus' atmosphere
prevented observers
from gathering the
data they needed.
The distance to Venus was not
measured with high precision
until two centuries later,
when astronomers of the 1960s
pinged the planet with radar.
This year's transit is the
second of an eight-year pair.
Anticipation was
high in June, 2004,
as Venus approached the sun.
No one alive at the time
had seen a transit of Venus
with their own eyes, and the
hand drawn sketches and grainy
photos of the previous
centuries scarcely
prepared them for what
was about to happen.
Modern solar telescopes
captured an unprecedented view
of Venus' atmosphere
back lit by solar fire.
They saw Venus transiting
the sun's ghostly corona
and gliding past magnetic
filaments big enough
to swallow the whole planet.
One photographer even caught
a spaceship, the International
Space Station, transiting
the sun alongside Venus.
2012 should be even better, as
cameras and solar telescopes
have improved.
Moreover, NASA's Solar
Dynamics Observatory
is going to be watching, too.
SDO will produce Hubble quality
images of this a rare event.
Apparently, one little black dot
really is worth all the fuss.
For more observing tips
and links to live webcasts,
visit science.nasa.gov.
>>LISA: So this is exciting--
this is something that's
happening right now
as the show is airing,
and where is the best place
to be able to see this?
>>MITCH: Well, any place--
it's still daylight,
so it doesn't make as
much of a difference,
as if it was night, such as an
eclipse or something that you
want the darkest place.
I would say any place
without obstruction,
and hopefully, it's
not a cloudy day,
and you should visually be able
to see it with the naked eye.
>>LISA: And you can see it
from anywhere in the world,
which is--
>>MITCH: That's true.
Right now, it's not showing
in the northern hemisphere,
so those of us here in the
United States-- actually
about two hours from
this show, so you
have time to watch
this and go out-- it
should be at its
apex for this area.
>>LISA: OK, and then what
does this mean to us?
How will this affect us?
>>MITCH: Well, I
think the NASA video
was good in explaining the
scientific explanation.
For others, they
kind of see it very
similar to what happened in
1987, which was the harmonic
convergence, that it
has some significance
of a part of the process.
I was in the harmonic
convergence-- I was part of it.
Matter of fact, I was in New
Mexico in the Manzano Mountains
with the Sufis, true story.
>>LISA: Oh, wow,
what an experience.
>>MITCH: And we were all out
there running around and--
>>LISA: Did you get
everything you wished for?
>>MITCH: Well, you know,
it was interesting.
No, nothing happened,
but it was fun.
>>LISA: That's what
it's all about is fun.
I mean when this
happened in 2004,
there was a lot around this and
there were a lot of pictures.
>>MITCH: It was very exciting.
We have some great pictures,
I think, here on the screen,
in this year will
be even better.
>>LISA: So this is
an actual photo--
>>MITCH: That's an actual photo.
>>LISA: --of a group of people
watching the Venus transit.
>>MITCH: Yes.
>>LISA: That's great,
and here's another one,
this is a natural
photo that was taken.
>>MITCH: That's right,
looks like maybe a 767 there
or something.
>>LISA: That's great.
One of our Facebook
listeners is saying,
can we feel this transit?
Will it actually have an effect
on us-- what will be expected?
>>MITCH: That's a very
subjective question.
I just told you my experience
with the harmonic convergence.
I really wanted it-- I mean I
was at a Sufi retreat-- I was
there all summer
living in a tent.
How much more
sensitive could I be?
But it was fun-- I enjoyed it.
Could I feel it in that moment?
My story is not, so those of you
who think that you're going to
fell it--
>>LISA: If you
believe it, then yes.
>>MITCH: If it happ--
tell us the story,
I'd love to get the
Facebook feedback.
>>LISA: Nevertheless,
you can go outside
and you can take
a lock, and here's
a picture on our
screen of essentially
what you're going to be seeing.
>>MITCH: Participate
in it-- just know
that billions
around the world are
going to be looking
at the same thing.
>>LISA: So Venus is passing
between the Earth and the sun.
>>MITCH: That's right.
>>LISA: OK, and
so now, does this
have anything to do
with the Earth changes
that we're talking
about, or could this
have anything to do
with the polarization
that we were talking about?
>>MITCH: Not that I'm aware of.
There are some
people who believe
when there's planetary
alignments, that that
causes Earth changing events.
This is what I know--
the scientific data says
that the alignment
of a full moon,
just our full moon
and the Earth,
has 100 times more effect on,
in this case would be water
displacement, tides, than
all nine planets lined up.
So I can't say no--
I'm open to whatever.
I mean what happens if it
happens to be in the way of--
and then what kind
of effect that has,
I don't know if anybody knows.
>>LISA: Are there
any particular--
are there solar flares
going on all the time?
>>MITCH: Yes, yesterday
or day before yesterday,
there was an M-3 Class flare,
and a following coronal mass
ejection that followed.
It's happening now.
>>LISA: It's happening
all the time.
One of the Facebook
questions coming in
is asking if they
have a magnetic bed
or if they use magnets
like magnetic therapy,
could this affect them
when these solar flares
and these particles come
charging in to the magnetic--
>>MITCH: Good
question-- I would like
to think in a positive way.
I'm all for magnetic therapy.
Those of you that are familiar
with Reiki and acupuncture,
acupuncture really
explains it all.
What acupuncture says is we have
a magnetic field that surrounds
our bodies, and then there's
the energy points, meridians,
and by the acupuncturist
manipulating
particular meridians,
depending on the element,
it brings balance
back to the body.
That's the good
news-- that's what
I think this is all
about-- you asked earlier.
I'd like to think that
my hypothesis would
be that it's going
to bring not only us,
but the earth, Gaia, back to
balance-- we're out of balance.
>>LISA: Well, now, exactly
how would that work?
>>MITCH: Tipped over.
>>LISA: Exactly, but that is
the point, that is actually
the point that many have
made, that this brings us
back together in
many different ways.
It brings us together
in our communities,
but how does it
correct us from being
off balance from a
perspective of our poles?
>>MITCH: I believe all
my research suggests--
I have two books, and I'm
working on the third--
that it's charged particles
that are the conduit.
Now, the Mayans call it ether,
they call it the new energy,
which ether is really not new,
but the way they describe it,
it is new.
Basically, if you
translate the language,
it's the space between space
is how they describe it.
Well, yes guess who showed up
at the Vatican-- scientists
from all over the
world who were talking
about the space between space.
Is there a connection?
Yes.
>>LISA: So I see there's
many ways that it actually
can connect us.
So you don't believe
that anything significant
is going to happen, actually,
on the day of December 21, 2012.
>>MITCH: No.
>>LISA: And why
do you think that?
>>MITCH: Well, I
can only tell you
that that's what every
Mayan elder that I've ever
interviewed or spoken
to has told me,
and I have no reason to disagree
with it-- it makes sense,
such as the harmonic
convergence, or even
today with the Venus transit.
Nothing-- well,
for some of you--
>>LISA: Earth-shattering
is happening.
>>MITCH: But what's
being lost in that,
because of Hollywood
and so forth,
is that the process
has already begun.
This is-- it's a window, and
you go through this transition,
that's what-- matter of fact,
that's the Mayan word they
use-- transition, and we're
in the transition now.
There's going to be
some up and downs,
and maybe you might
have a peak experience,
but I doubt it's going
to be on that day.
>>LISA: And you've spend a
lot of time with these Hopis
and shamans, and
people telling you this
is not necessarily true.
>>MITCH: I have.
This is just one of my
uniforms-- believe me,
folks, I dress down, and I
get right in there with them.
Try fasting for three days,
that's a religious experience.
>>LISA: So how long
would we expect something
like this to last?
Does it go into 2013, 2014?
One of our listeners is
actually even saying 2016?
>>MITCH: Well, there's a lot
of controversy about that,
and even some of
the what I believe
to be highly esteemed elders
who are knowledgeable,
think that the bad
stuff, if you want
to call it that, the big shift,
may not occur until 2050.
I've heard 2015, 2016,
I really can't say.
I think the
transition has begun.
Check back with me in a year.
>>LISA: I don't see a lot
of fear are coming from you.
I don't see a lot of
conspiracy theory coming
from what you have to say here.
I see what you have to
say as fairly scientific,
and has been validated
by NASA and other people,
other organizations,
scientific organizations,
have endorsed your
work, haven't they?
>>MITCH: Oh, yes they have.
The effect former director of
NOAA, the space weather center,
Doctor Hildner, the
deputy director of SOHO,
the European Space Agency,
the leading director
at the Royal Observatory,
Tom van Flandern
of the US Naval Observatory--
yeah, these are heavy hitters.
>>LISA: And do those
organizations say that there's
going to be a big shift,
and if so, what would it be?
>>MITCH: Not as of
this date, and I
don't think it would
be wise for them to.
They really need to
be careful with this.
I had a big discussion of
omission versus disclosure--
omission versus
disclosure-- and whether it
be 9/11 or Katrina or these
big significant events, what
is better for the population--
omission, in other words,
keep it down, or disclosure,
let the people handle it, tell
them the truth.
I'm not sure what the answer is.
I lean towards
disclosure myself.
>>LISA: Ultimately, yes.
>>MITCH: That's-- my audience,
probably your audience--
I just got that-- you know,
I think other countries would
definitely have a better
adjustment then we would.
We are the most advanced
country in the world,
that's like a
double edged sword.
We've got the technology
that's second to none,
but we've gotten
dumbed down a bit.
>>LISA: In what way,
what do you mean?
>>MITCH: I don't think
our intuitive nature,
our true senses is working,
is firing on all cylinders.
I think we've kind of--
technology has its advantages,
but I think it takes away
from our natural abilities.
For example, the
animals-- I think
animals can sense earthquakes
or something coming,
and they know what to do.
I think we used
to have that, too.
>>MITCH: You only speak from
some type of experience.
Have you seen
this, where there's
technologies or intuitions
that are available to us
that we don't necessarily
tap into on a regular basis?
>>MITCH: Every day, and
I'm guilty of it myself.
If I don't have my
cell phone with me,
if I'm not texting,
if I'm not online,
if I'm not writing questions
into Facebook, I'm lost, right?
We fill every day
with such technology,
but where's the interplay?
Do you know your neighbors?
How many of you can tell
me who your neighbors
on your left and your right?
>>LISA: Well, when we have this
amazing technology out in space
that can literally
take a picture of Mars
and transmit it back to
us, and these are just
incredible technologies.
If you look at things like that
from a scientific perspective,
it makes sense to consume
that information instead.
>>MITCH: Absolutelt--
again, there's
the marriage of the
two, and the escalation
of Earth changing events
that I believe are happening.
I think that's its purpose,
is the Earth changing events--
earthquakes, volcanoes,
and so forth--
there is a pattern
of escalation.
I believe it's going to
continue for a while,
it's part of the process.
I don't see it as
punishment, I don't see it
as trying to hurt us and
that we're bringing it on.
I think-- well, actually,
we might be bringing it on--
that it's here to
help us, that maybe
if something was to occur that
disrupts our Facebook and all
this stuff, that maybe we
might meet our neighbors,
and maybe we might find
that we need each other,
and maybe we might
develop something
called a community, family.
>>LISA: Well, one of our
Facebook questions coming in
is saying-- Margie is saying
if there is an actual pole
shift that happens, will the
North and the South Poles
shift?
>>MITCH: Yes.
>>LISA: Then when we get to
know all sorts of communities.
>>MITCH: Margie,
there is a pole shift,
but that is not
crustal displacement.
The earth is not going to flip,
the magnetic pole will flip,
and that is significant.
>>LISA: What if that mean to us?
>>MITCH: That means that
the weather patterns
will change significantly.
It's a pattern of
events that take up,
geographically, a very
short period of time,
but to us may seem longer.
It could happen within
a 44-year period,
and what we would see is the
magnetic north bouncing around,
maybe at first just
over to Canada or--
>>LISA: What would
that look like, though?
How would that affect us?
>>MITCH: Literally, airlines,
anybody with GPS services,
all the satellites and
airlines and so on, they have
to recalibrate their
instruments all the time--
>>LISA: Constantly.
>>MITCH: Constantly, because
the magnetic pole is shifting.
>>LISA: They do right now?
>>MITCH: They do right now.
>>LISA: Interesting--
>>MITCH: Right now.
>>LISA: And this is all because
of the solar activity cutting
through the magnetic field,
going down and creating
that resonant effect,
so this is really,
truly affecting the grids.
>>MITCH: It is, all
as part of a cycle.
We've seen it-- the earth has
seen this many times before--
>>MITCH: But it's
not catastrophic.
>>MITCH: The pole shift?
>>LISA: Right.
>>MITCH: No.
>>LISA: But the climate changes?
>>MITCH: That could
be significant.
Right now, we're going through
not a pleasant warming trend,
but I think it's
going to be worse
when the cooling
trend comes myself.
>>LISA: Is there
anything specific
that you do in your life to
prepare for any-- with all
of your knowledge
and everything?
>>MITCH: Well, you
know, I met my neighbors
for the first time.
>>LISA: That was the last
time I saw my neighbors--
>>MITCH: I hope I have
one minute at to leave you
with this-- I worked
with the Red Cross
and I worked with
FEMA, and I'll never
forget what my FEMA
instructor said.
He said when a
large event occurs
or when there's a series
of events that occur,
it's not going to be
the fire department that
comes to your rescue,
it's not going
to be the police department
that comes to your rescue,
it's not even going
to be the Red Cross,
it's going to be your neighbor.
>>LISA: Beautifully
said, thank you
so much for joining me
today, it's been a pleasure.
I've learned a lot.
I appreciate
everything you said,
and thank you so
much for watching.
If you'd like to watch
a replay of my interview
with Mitch Battros, you
could go and share it
with your friends--
go to gaiamtv.com,
there's a lot more thought
provoking interviews there,
as well, and inspirational
films, so go sign up
for a free trial at gaiamtv.com,
and until next time,
I invite you to stay inspired.